[DOCS] Add runtime fields contexts to Painless execute API docs (#72131)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/painless/painless-guide/painless-execute-script.asciidoc

Use this API to build and test scripts, such as when defining a script for a
{ref}/runtime.html[runtime field]. This API requires very few dependencies, and is
especially useful if you don't have permissions to write documents on a cluster.

The API uses several _contexts_, which control how scripts are executed, what
variables are available at runtime, and what the return type is.

Each context requires a script, but additional parameters depend on the context
you're using for that script.

[[painless-execute-api-request-body]]
==== {api-request-body-title}
`script`:: (Required, object)
The Painless script to execute.
+
.Properties of `script`
--
include::../painless-contexts/painless-runtime-fields-context.asciidoc[tag=runtime-field-emit]
--

`context`:: (Optional, string)
The context that the script should run in. Defaults to `painless_test` if no
context is specified.
+
.Properties of `context`
[%collapsible%open]
====
`painless_test`::
The default context if no other context is specified.

`filter`::
Treats scripts as if they were run inside a `script` query.

`score`::
Treats scripts as if they were run inside a `script_score` function in a
`function_score` query.

> [[painless-execute-runtime-context]]

Reviewer: Should this be at the top or lower? I feel like these are less important than the default context at least. Or, if not less important, less common.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to remove the **Examples** header and instead bump the different context sections up a level to make them more prominent in the side navigation.

> .Runtime fields context

Reviewer: Maybe its more correct to call these field scripts now that we can add them at index time. I think that code has landed, right?

Reviewer 2: Agree! I'm changing the name of this section to **Field contexts** and referring to them as such throughout this document. cc: @javanna to confirm that we want to use this naming convention.

[%collapsible%open]
=====
--

> The following contexts are specific to runtime fields.

Reviewer: What about something like "Each runtime field context runs the script as though it were in a runtime field." or something like that. The other headings have kind of relatable descriptions of the contexts and this one doesn't.

Reviewer 2: I added a better description under the Field context heading:

>The field contexts treat scripts as if they were run inside the `runtime_mappings` section of a search query. You can use field contexts to test scripts for different field types, and then include those scripts anywhere that they're supported, such as  runtime fields.

Reviewer: Nice!

NOTE: Result ordering in the runtime field context is not guaranteed.
--

****
`boolean_field`:: 
Emits a `boolean` data type and returns a sorted list of `boolean` values. See
<<painless-runtime-boolean,boolean_field>>.

`date_field`:: 

> Emits a `long` data type and returns a sorted list of `long` values. See

Reviewer: Maybe more like "The context used for `date` fields. `emit` takes a `long` and the script returns a sorted list of dates." or something.

Reviewer: I think it'd be useful to have a link to the docs of the field. And to call out "this is exactly the same script as you send on the field".

Reviewer 2: I updated the description for each of the field contexts and also added a link to the doc page for each related data type.

Emits a `long` data type and returns a sorted list of `double` values. See
<<painless-runtime-double,double_field>>.

`geo_point_field`::
Emits a `long` data type and returns a sorted list of `double` values. See
<<painless-runtime-geo,geo_point_field>>.

`ip_field`::
Emits a `string` data type and returns a sorted list of `string` values. See
<<painless-runtime-ip,ip_field>>.

`keyword_field`::
Emits a `string` data type and returns a sorted list of `string` values. See
<<painless-runtime-keyword,keyword_field>>.

`long_field`::
Emits a `long` data type and returns a sorted list of `long` values. See
<<painless-runtime-long,long_field>>.
****
=====
====

`context_setup`:: (Required, object)
Additional parameters for the `context`.
+
NOTE: This parameter is required for all contexts except `painless_test`,
which is the default if no value is provided for `context`.
+
.Properties of `context_setup`
[%collapsible%open]
====
`document`:: (Required, string)
Document that's temporarily indexed in-memory and accessible from the script.

`index`:: (Required, string)
Index containing a mapping that's compatible with the indexed document.
====

`params`:: (`Map`, read-only)

> User-defined parameters passed in as part of the query.

Reviewer: Are these the script params that come in the `params` map in the script?

Reviewer 2: Yeah -- should that description be something like:
>Script parameters that you pass in as part of the query.

`query`:: (Optional, object)
NOTE: This parameter only applies when `score` is specified as the script 

> `context`.

Reviewer: Runtime fields don't interact with `_score` so maybe we don't need to talk about it?

Reviewer 2: The `query` parameter isn't specific to the field contexts here, but as a parameter you can include in the overall request body.

  "result": 0.8
}
--------------------------------------------------

==== Runtime field contexts

Runtime field contexts execute a script used for a runtime field and return results in doc-values order.

[[painless-execute-api-contexts-runtime-fields]]
.Contexts
[options="header"]
|======
| Name            | Emit Type      | Return Type
| boolean_field   | boolean        | sorted list of booleans
| date_field      | long (ms)      | sorted list of longs (ms)
| double_field    | double         | sorted list of doubles

> | geo_point_field | long (encoded) | sorted list of longs (encoded)

Reviewer: I think geo point is two `double`s?

> | ip_field        | String         | sorted list of BytesRef[] (encoded)

Reviewer: I think `BytesRef` might not be a concept that folks are used to seeing outside of ES. The execute API returns the ips formatted as a string, right? So maybe that is what it should say?

| keyword_field   | String         | sorted list of Strings
| long_field      | long           | sorted list of longs
|======

[[painless-execute-api-parameters-runtime-fields]]
.Parameters
[options="header"]
|======
| Name              | Required  | Default | Description
| `script`          | yes       | -       | The script to execute.
| `context`         | yes       | -       | The runtime field context the script should be executed in.
| `context_setup`   | yes       | -       | Additional parameters to the context.
|======

> Specification of the following parameters is required in `context_setup` for a runtime field context:

Reviewer: I'd find this easier to understand if you wrote it in the active voice. "`context_setup` must contain `document` and `index`. Or something. I dunno.

Reviewer 3: ++ If you want to keep the list, you can do something like:

```suggestion
`context_setup` requires the following parameters:
```

> document:: Contains the document that will be temporarily indexed in-memory and is accessible from the script.
> index:: The name of an index containing a mapping that is compatible with the document being indexed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
document:: Document that's temporarily indexed in-memory and accessible from the script.

index:: Index containing a mapping that's compatible with the indexed document.
```

*Examples*

* boolean_field
+
[source,console]

> ----------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: Asciidoc only requires four `-`s so I've started to just use 4 of 'em.

PUT /my-index-boolean
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "b": {
        "type": "boolean"
      }
    }
  }
}

POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": "emit(params['p']); emit(doc['b'].value);",
    "params": {
      "p": true
    }
  },
  "context": "boolean_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-boolean",
    "document": {
      "b": false
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer 4: would you mind using a more meaningful example?

Author: I went with the simplest way to show an emit in a runtime fields script, but I'm definitely happy to provide more meaningful examples. Any suggestions?

Reviewer 2: @jdconrad, we could reuse existing examples for runtime fields. The example from [Mapping a runtime field](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/runtime-mapping-fields.html) is both useful and meaningful, as are the examples that I'm working on for [field extraction](https://elasticsearch_71596.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/common-script-uses.html#scripting-field-extraction).

Author: @lockewritesdocs This is a great suggestion!

----------------------------------------------------------------
+
Response:
+
[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "result": [
    false,
    true
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
+
* date_field
+
[source,console]
----------------------------------------------------------------
PUT /my-index-date
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "d": {
        "type": "date"
      }
    }
  }
}

POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": "emit(doc['d'].value.toInstant().toEpochMilli());"
  },
  "context": "date_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-date",
    "document": {
      "d": 2075885659000
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------------------------------------
+
Response:
+
[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "result": [

>     2075885659000

Reviewer 4: not sure I get it, what's the use of this script?

    "properties": {
      "g": {
        "type": "geo_point"
      }
    }
  }
}

POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": "emit(doc['g'].value.lat + 1.2, doc['g'].value.lon - 2.3)"
  },
  "context": "geo_point_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-geo-point",
    "document": {
      "g": "71.34,85.92"
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------------------------------------
+
Response:
+
[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "result": [
    7434037857170656882
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
+
* ip_field
+
[source,console]
----------------------------------------------------------------
PUT /my-index-ip
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "i": {
        "type": "ip"
      }
    }
  }
}

POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": "emit(doc['i'].value)"
  },
  "context": "ip_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-ip",
    "document": {
      "i": "127.0.0.1"
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------------------------------------
+
Response:
+
[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "result": [

>     "AAAAAAAAAAAAAP//fwAAAQ=="

Reviewer: I think you should try and plug in the ip address formatter here to get the right formatting.

Author: Thank you for the discussion here -- created another PR to make the output make more sense for date, geo_point, and ip types.

https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/72135

    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[continued]

===== Response

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result": 0.8
}
----

[[painless-execute-runtime-field-context]]
===== Runtime field context
The <<painless-runtime-fields-context,runtime field context>> runs a script used
for a runtime field and returns results in doc-values order.

Although runtime fields have their own context within the Painless execute API,
you indicate the context for a runtime field based on the data type you want to
return.

[[painless-runtime-boolean]]
====== `boolean_field`
Use the `boolean_field` runtime field context when you want to return a `true`
or `false` value from a script valuation. {ref}/boolean.html[Boolean fields]
accept `true` and `false` values, but can also accept strings that are
interpreted as either true or false. 

Let's say you have data for the top 100 science fiction books of all time. You
want to write scripts that return a boolean response such as whether books
exceed a certain page count, or if a book was published after a specific year.

> Add the following fields to your mapping:

Reviewer: If we're talking about this API as a way to test things without modifying the cluster it's probably worth rewording this to something more like "If you have an index like this:" .... "then you can run the execute API like this".

[source,console]
----
PUT /my-index-000001
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "name": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "author": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "release_date": {
        "type": "date"
      },
      "page_count": {
        "type": "double"
      }
    }
  }
}
----

You can then write a script in the `boolean_field` context that indicates
whether a book was published before the year 1972:

[source,console]
----
POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": """

>        emit(doc['release_date'].value.dayOfYear < 1972);

Reviewer: `.dayOfYear` would return whatever day June first was on 1972. Like 160 or something. I think you want `.year` here.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, I'll make that change.

      "name": "Dune",
      "author": "Frank Herbert",
      "release_date": "1965-06-01",
      "page_count": 604
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[continued]

Because `Frank` is five characters, the response returns `false` for the script
valuation:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result" : [
    false
  ]
}
----

[[painless-runtime-datetime]]
===== `date_time`
Several options are available for using
<<painless-datetime,using datetime in Painless>>. In this example, you'll
estimate when a particular author starting writing a book based on its release
date and the writing speed of that author. The example makes some assumptions,
but shows to write a script that operates on a date while incorporating
additional information.

Add the following fields to your index mapping to get started:

[source,console]
----
PUT /my-index-000001
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "name": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "author": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "release_date": {
        "type": "date"
      },
      "page_count": {
        "type": "long"
      }
    }
  }
}
----

The following script adds a variable named `pageTime`. The value for this field

> is `28800000` milliseconds, which equates to eight hours. We'll assume that this

Reviewer: I'd say what you think the script does, specifically it makes a terrible guess about when the author started writing the book based solely on the page count and some bonkers assumptions about how quickly they write. Once you've said something about that you can get how it works. In this case I might even intentionally come across a bit snarky because I think the example is a bit silly, but its *contained* which is what is important about it.

This script is far to hacky to "assess" anything. Its meant to be silly.

Reviewer: Also, for what it is worth, I think it'd be a little easier to read if we commented the script. Maybe:
```
    String author = doc['author'].value;
    long pageTime = 28800000;  // eight hours
    if (author == 'Robert A. Heinlein') {
      pageTime /= 2; // he's obviously fast
    } else if (author == 'Alastair Reynolds') {
      pageTime *= 2; // space opera is slower
    }
    emit(doc['release_date'].value.toInstant().toEpochMilli() - pageTime * doc['page_count'].value);
```

If you do something like this then there isn't really much need to explain the "how" the script works in prose - just what you think it does.

Reviewer 2: Good callouts, and thanks for reminding me that we can be fun in our docs 🥳

`pageTime` by two if that's the matching author.

Then, the script subtracts the release date value (in milliseconds) from the
calculation of `pageTime` times the `page_count` to determine approximately when
the author began writing the book.

[source,console]
----
POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": """
    String author = doc['author'].value;
    long pageTime = 28800000;
    if (author == 'Robert A. Heinlein') {
      pageTime /= 2;
    } else if (author == 'Alastair Reynolds') {
      pageTime *= 2;
    }
    emit(doc['release_date'].value.toInstant().toEpochMilli() - pageTime * doc['page_count'].value);
    """
  },
  "context": "date_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-000001",
    "document": {
      "name": "Revelation Space",
      "author": "Alastair Reynolds",
      "release_date": "2000-03-15",
      "page_count": 585
    }
  }
}
----
//TEST[continued]

In this case, the author is Alastair Reynolds. Based on a release date of
`2000-03-15`, the script calculates that the author started writing
`Revelation Space` on 19 February 1999. Writing a 585 page book in just over one

> year is pretty impressive!

Reviewer: There we go, that's the humor we need for this example!

  ]
}
----

[[painless-runtime-double]]
===== `double_field`
Use the `double_field` runtime context for {ref}/number.html[numeric data] of type
`double`. For example, let's say you have sensor data that includes a `voltage`
field with values like 5.6. You need to multiply this value, but only for
sensors that match a specific model number.

Add the following fields to your index mapping. The `voltage` field is a 
sub-field of the `measures` object.

[source,console]
----
PUT my-index-000001
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "@timestamp": {
        "type": "date"
      },
      "model_number": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "measures": {
        "properties": {
          "voltage": {
            "type": "double"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

The following script matches on any documents where the `model_number` equals
`QVKC92Q`, and then multiplies the `voltage` value by `1.7`. This script is
useful when you want to select specific documents and only operate on values
that match the specified criteria.

[source,console]
----
POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": """if (doc['model_number'].value.equals('QVKC92Q'))

>         {emit(1.7 * params._source['measures']['voltage']);}

Reviewer: We should probably be consistent in how we format the scripts on this page - I'd prefer taller rather than wider even though its hard to get everything on a page. I find it nicer to work with scripts that are formatted that way.

Reviewer 2: Good callout! I'll standardize the format throughout.

    "index": "my-index-000001",
    "document": {
      "@timestamp": 1516470094000,
      "model_number": "QVKC92Q",
      "measures": {
        "voltage": 5.6
      }
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[continued]

The result includes the calculated voltage, which was determined by multiplying
the original value of `5.6` by `1.7`:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result" : [
    9.52
  ]
}
----

[[painless-runtime-geo]]
===== `geo_point_field`
{ref}/geo-point.html[Geo point] fields accept latitude-longitude pairs. You can define a
geo-point field in several ways, and include values for latitude and longitude
in the document for your script.

If you already have a known geo-point, it's simpler to clearly state the
positions of `lat` and `lon` in your index mappings. 

[source,console]
----
PUT /my-index-000001/
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "lat": {
        "type": "double"
      },
     "lon": {
        "type": "double"
      }
    }
  }
}
----

You can then use the `geo_point_field` runtime field context to write a script
that retrieves the `lat` and `long` values.

[source,console]
----
POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": """

>         emit(doc['lat'].value, doc['lon'].value);

Reviewer: This still uses the old style "noop" script. We'd talked about waiting on this one for later. Is that still what you are thinking?

Reviewer 2: I talked to Ignacio, and he said that this is the preferred method. I originally included a `location` object in the mappings, and then used `emit(doc['location'].lat, doc['location'].lon);` in the script. Ignacio said that it's better if the original mapping includes `lat` and `lon` fields mapped as `double` so that you can use them to emit a geopoint. This was my original:

```
PUT /my-index-000001/
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "location": {
        "type": "geo_point"
      }
    }
  }
}
POST /_scripts/painless/_execute
{
  "script": {
    "source": """
        emit(doc['location'].lat, doc['location'].lon);
        """
  },
  "context": "geo_point_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-000001",
    "document": {
      "location": {
        "lat": 41.12,
        "lon": -71.34
      }
    }
  }
}
```

    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[continued]

===== Response

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result": 0.8
}
----

[[painless-execute-runtime-field-context]]
==== Field contexts
The field contexts treat scripts as if they were run inside the
{ref}/runtime-search-request.html[`runtime_mappings` section] of a search query.
You can use field contexts to test scripts for different field types, and then
include those scripts anywhere that they're supported, such as  <<painless-runtime-fields,runtime fields>>.

Choose a field context based on the data type you want to return.

[[painless-runtime-boolean]]
===== `boolean_field`
Use the `boolean_field` field context when you want to return a `true`
or `false` value from a script valuation. {ref}/boolean.html[Boolean fields]
accept `true` and `false` values, but can also accept strings that are

> interpreted as either true or false. 

Reviewer 2: I meant that boolean fields (the data type) can also accept strings, but that might be confusing within this context. I think I'll just remove that second sentence.

      "page_count": 604
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[continued]

Because `Frank` is five characters, the response returns `false` for the script
valuation:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result" : [
    false
  ]
}
----

[[painless-runtime-datetime]]
===== `date_time`
Several options are available for using
<<painless-datetime,using datetime in Painless>>. In this example, you'll
estimate when a particular author starting writing a book based on its release
date and the writing speed of that author. The example makes some assumptions,
but shows to write a script that operates on a date while incorporating
additional information.

Add the following fields to your index mapping to get started:

[source,console]
----
PUT /my-index-000001
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "name": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "author": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "release_date": {
        "type": "date"
      },
      "page_count": {
        "type": "long"
      }
    }
  }
}
----

The following script adds a variable named `pageTime` and makes an incredible
assumption that this is an approximate time required to write a complete page

> for a book.

Reviewer: What about something like:
The following script makes the incredible assumption that to write a book you just write each page and don't do research or revisions. Further, it assumes that the average time it takes to write a page is eight minutes.

But, yeah, I like the rewrite on this you did yesterday!

      }
      emit(doc['release_date'].value.toInstant().toEpochMilli() - pageTime * doc['page_count'].value);
    """
  },
  "context": "date_field",
  "context_setup": {
    "index": "my-index-000001",
    "document": {
      "name": "Revelation Space",
      "author": "Alastair Reynolds",
      "release_date": "2000-03-15",
      "page_count": 585
    }
  }
}
----
//TEST[continued]
<1> Eight hours, represented in milliseconds
<2> Incredibly fast writing from Robert A. Heinlein
<3> Alastair Reynolds writes space operas at a much slower speed

In this case, the author is Alastair Reynolds. Based on a release date of
`2000-03-15`, the script calculates that the author started writing
`Revelation Space` on 19 February 1999. Writing a 585 page book in just over one
year is pretty impressive!

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "result" : [
    "1999-02-19T00:00:00.000Z"
  ]
}
----

[[painless-runtime-double]]
===== `double_field`
Use the `double_field` context for {ref}/number.html[numeric data] of type
`double`. For example, let's say you have sensor data that includes a `voltage`
field with values like 5.6. You need to multiply this value, but only for

> sensors that match a specific model number.

Reviewer: Maybe "But you find out after indexing millions of documents that sensor with the model number `QVKC92Q` underreport their voltage by a factor of `1.7`. Rather than rebuild your data you fix it with a runtime field."

Reviewer 2: Love this, and will include it.
